================
Data Categories
================


Due to the extensive collection of data made available by the ISB-CGC, the datasets hosted in Google BigQuery is organized into four categories in our ISB-CGC BigQuery Table Search user interface, **Processed-omics datasets**, **Genomic Reference Database**, **File Metadata**, and **Clinical Biospecimen Data**. 

Compilation of datasets stores multiple tables. It can be uniquely identified based on the Google Cloud Platform (GCP) project name (in this case **isb-cgc**), and the dataset name, separated by a colon (or a period, in standard SQL),  *e.g.* ``isb-cgc.TCGA_bioclin_v0``.  Tables are uniquely identified by appending the table name,
preceded by a period, *e.g.* ``isb-cgc.TCGA_bioclin_v0.Clinical``.

Processed-omics Datasets
========================

Processed data primarily from the GDC for TCGA, TARGET, and CCLE (i.e., raw data that has gone through GDC pipeline processing e.g., gene expression, miRNA expression, copy number, somatic mutations, methylation.)

DNA Methylation
----------------

Processed data were generated using Illumina Human Methylation 27k and 450k platforms and broken down by chromosome. The entire dataset is all available, which includes all chromosomes in one table.

Somatic Mutations
------------------

Reports somatic mutations for all of the cases in a project and includes information associated with each mutation.

mRNA Expression
----------------

Gene expression data from the Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 analysis, ranked Hg38 gene expression data,  Illumina GA, HiSeq sequencing platforms, and the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) Project.  

miRNA Expression
-----------------

Data was generated by the comparison of individual reads to sequence feature annotations in miRBase v21 and UCSC, Illumina GA, and HiSeq sequencing platforms. 

Protein Quantification
-------------------------

Total protein quantitation data was generated by traditional methods such as the measurement of UV absorbance at 280 nm, Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) and Bradford assays.

Copy Number
------------

The tables were generated by first normalizing array intensity values, estimating raw copy number, and performing tangent normalization, which subtracts variation that is found in a set of normal samples. 

Genomic Reference Database
===========================

Genomic information that can be used to cross-reference against processed-omics data tables (e.g., COSMIC, ClinVar, cytoBand, dbSNP.)

DNA Methylation
----------------

Platform reference annotations, lift over, and liftover to hg38 coordinates workflow is available.  Also, it includes an extensive characterization of probes on multiple microarray workflows.

Somatic Mutations
------------------

Reference for human single nucleotide variations, microsatellites, small-scale insertions, and deletions from multiple tools and databases including Kaviar database. 

Genome Annotation
------------------

This category represents datasets which contain information about the contents of a genome.  This includes, for example, the location and base change of nucleotide polymorphisms, the genomic location and function of genes, or the targets of miRNAs.

Genome Annotation data was generated from multiple Ensembl gene-set versions, and multiple GENCODE reference gene set versions. 

Pathway annotations data has been loaded from multiple ENSEMBL to All pathways mapping workflows from REACTOME, Badar Lab's EnrichmentMap workflow, and WikiPathways.

Related Genome Ontology data is provided by the GO Consortium and the Gene Ontology Resource. 

The database also includes miRNA Expression annotations and target interactions loaded from the miRBase database and the miRTarBase database.

File Metadata
==============

Information about raw data files including Google Cloud Storage paths (e.g. tables with information about files available at the GDC, including GCS paths, creation dates, file uuids, etc.)


Case ID Data
-------------

Example table end name in BigQuery: rel#_caseData

All case barcode information active and legacy databases is available from the Genomic Data Commons API. You are able to find the 'case_gdc_id' along with the corresponding 'legacy_file_count' and the 'active_file_count' in this table. The 'case_gdc_id' provides the ability to create joins across all file metadata tables generated from the GDC.

Current File Data
------------------

Example table end name in BigQuery: rel#_fileData_active

List of the currently active cases in GDC along with information related to those cases.  All possible information returned from the Genomic Data Commons API active database. 

Legacy File Data
-----------------

Example table end name in BigQuery: rel#_fileData_legacy

Same as the current file data table but, with legacy data instead.

GDC file ID to Google Cloud Storage bucket location
----------------------------------------------------

Example table end name in BigQuery: rel#_GDCfileID_to_GCSurl

Provides the Google Cloud Storage location for each file present at the Genomic Data Commons.


Case ID to Slide ID mapping
----------------------------

Example table end name in BigQuery: rel#_slide2caseIDmap

A “helper” table to help map between identifiers at different levels of tissue slide data. 

The intrinsic hierarchy is program > project > case > sample > portion > slide.

Case ID to Aliquot ID Mapping
-----------------------------

Example table end name in BigQuery: rel#_aliquot2caseIDmap

A “helper” table to help map between identifiers at different levels of aliquot data. 

The intrinsic hierarchy is program > project > case > sample > portion > analyte > aliquot.


Clinical Biospecimen Data
==========================

Patient case and sample information (includes clinical tables with patient demographic data, and biospecimen data with detailed sample information.)

Clinical
--------

Patient diagnosis, exposures, and demographic data, along with Clinical Annotation, can be found.

Biospecimen
------------

Patient information on cases tissue sample types, along with details on the generation process of data.

