**********************
Programs and Data Sets
**********************

The `National Cancer Institute <https://www.cancer.gov/about-nci>`_, in collaboration with other institutes within `NIH <https://www.nih.gov/>`_, has invested in the production and analysis of several large datasets. The ISB-CGC platform is funded by NCI to make these data more accessible and usable.

The initial goal of the `ISB-CGC <http://www.isb-cgc.org>`_ was to host the data produced by `The Cancer Genome Atlas <https://cancergenome.nih.gov/abouttcga>`_ (TCGA) program. The data has expanded to include data sets from other programs such as  `Therapeutically Applicable Research To Generate Effective Treatments <https://ocg.cancer.gov/programs/target>`_ (TARGET) program.

Along with NCI Cancer Programs, ISB-CGC hosts several data sets from other programs such as `Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer <https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic>`_ (COSMIC) from the `Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute <http://www.sanger.ac.uk/>`_. We are always looking to add new data sets so if you have any suggestions or requests for additional data that you would like to see made available, please let us know (feedback@isb-cgc.org) and we will try to make that happen.

Data Sets
---------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   
   data/TCGA_top
   data/TCGA-images
   data/TARGET_top
   data/CCLE_top
   data/COSMIC_about
   data/FM-AD_about
   data/CTSP_about
   data/VAREPOP_about
   data/NCICCR_about

NCI Genomic Data Commons
------------------------

The NCI’s Genomic Data Commons (GDC) provides the cancer research community with a unified data repository that enables data sharing across cancer genomic studies in support of precision medicine. ISB-CGC hosts a series of reference tables in BigQuery.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   
   data/GDC_top

Reference Data Sets
-------------------

ISB-CGC hosts a series of reference tables in BigQuery with information that describes or annotates the human (or other) genome(s) or is necessary to work with data generated by specific platforms.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   
   data/Reference-Data

Storage Platforms
----------------
As part of its mission, the ISB-CGC has been exploring the best ways to use available cloud technologies to provide access to the data. To this end, the data is made available using these three main Google Cloud Platform technologies:

* `Google BigQuery <https://cloud.google.com/bigquery/>`_ (BQ),  
   a massively-parallel analytics engine is ideal for working with data that is essentially tabular in nature. This includes the high-level clinical, biospecimen, and molecular data from the main NCI programs. It is also where we store a large amount of metadata about files that are more appropriately stored in Google Cloud Storage, as well as genome reference sources (*e.g.* GENCODE, miRBase, *etc.*). All of these datasets and tables are completely *open access* and available to the research community.

* `Google Cloud Storage <https://cloud.google.com/storage/>`_ (GCS), 
   a cloud-based object-store is used to store other types of (typically binary) data which is typically processed by custom software pipelines. In this case, it means the low-level sequence data, in BAM or FASTQ format, as well as pathology and radiology images (in SVS or DICOM format). All controlled-access data is currently only available in GCS -- access to these data requires that a user walk through the required `authentication and authorization steps <http://isb-cancer-genomics-cloud.readthedocs.io/en/latest/sections/webapp/Gaining-Access-To-Contolled-Access-Data.html>`_.

* `Google Genomics <https://cloud.google.com/genomics/>`_ (GG),
   provides a way to work with sequence-level data, via the `GA4GH API <http://ga4gh.org/#/>`_.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   
   data/data_in_BQ.rst
   data/data_in_GCS.rst
   data/data_in_GG.rst

Security
--------

It is recommended that you review important information about data security and data access.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   
   data/TCGA_Data_Security
   
**A note about legacy and harmonized data sets**

Programs like TCGA that pre-date the Genomic Data Commons will have both legacy data sets (data as originally generated by the program) and harmonized data sets created by the Genomic Data Commons.  Whiles these data sets do have much in common, as part of the GDC harmonization process several changes can occur including removal or addition of cases and samples or changes in terminology.  One of the goals of the ISB-CGC is to stay current with changes introduced by GDC and therefore you may find differences between legacy data and harmonized data.
